Do you know what I mean if I say blender
cutting?
>> People go out and shoot with eight
cameras and they go in the editing room
and just throw it in a blender and they
just blah blah blah blah blah.
>> That's Thelma Shoemaker, the editor of
most of Martin Scorsese's movies and one
of the greatest editors of all time. You
can find examples of this that are so
extreme they've become memes.
[music]
Fast editing itself isn't necessarily
the problem. Even Thelma uses quick cuts
effectively at times. [screaming]
So, what's really missing here?
>> Marty keeps saying, "What happened to
the shop?"
>> The shot begins as they drag the
prisoner to a hospital bed.
>> Frank, if you can hear me, don't worry.
I'm going to
>> FBI agent Carl Henry, played by Tom
Hanks, has finally caught up with Frank
Abagnail, and he's not about to let him
die before they can go to trial. As Carl
confronts the prison warden, the camera
pushes in for a dramatic twoot.
>> Suddenly, the warden notices something.
The camera pans to follow his gaze. The
warden and the viewer have the same
thought as the camera's already lining
up the composition for a dramatic
reveal. As the chase begins, the camera
pushes in on Henry's amused face.
>> This is the shot. We swoop down past
prisoners, cheering and pounding against
the chainlink fence to reveal Frank as
he stumbles forward in his desperate
escape attempt. As he forces himself
onto his feet to continue, he looms over
the camera before falling to his knees
in front of us. This is the shot.
Finally caught at the end of the line,
Frank falls backward in defeat. Now the
camera looms over Frank. There's nowhere
left to go. The camera drifts upwards.
>> Let's go home. And even though this is
the start of the film, we know we've
flashed forward to the end of the story.
This is the shot. And the shot is what's
lost when blender cutting is used.
A shot is the fundamental unit of film
making. But what's the difference
between a shot? I mean any old shot, and
what Thelma and Scorsesei are calling
the shot.
>> For me, one of the undisputed masters of
the shot is Steven Spielberg.
There are many directors who excel at
crafting the shot in different ways, but
I think what draws me to Spielberg
specifically is that he has a way of
crafting an incredibly engaging shot
that kind of sneaks up on you a little
bit. Here's what I mean. This shot from
Jaws is so deceptively simple yet
brilliant. If you look at a still frame,
there may not appear to be much going
on. It's just a camera on a tripod on a
ferry. The scene runs for a minute and
42 seconds as a single shot. And here
the mayor is confronting police chief
Martin Brody about his decision to shut
down the beaches to protect people from
the killer shark.
>> Martin, you going to shut down the
beaches on your own authority? In the
original screenplay by Peter Benshley,
this scene takes place with the
character standing on the beach. But
Spielberg makes the simple yet brilliant
choice of placing it on an active ferry,
adding additional visual interest to the
scene through the constantly changing
background. Spielberg could have been
like, "Hey, this is cool. That's all we
need to do." But he takes it even
further. He's also blocking the
characters within the frame in a way
that varies their height and groups them
together into triangles using rules of
composition that go all the way back to
classical painting tradition in order to
create a sense of balance and visual
interest in how the characters are
staged. Chief Brody looks and feels
cornered on the ferry. He literally and
figuratively in this scene has his back
against a wall. And even though the
shifting background already adds
interesting movement to the scene,
Spielberg still uses blocking to change
the composition and break up this single
shot into smaller chunks, essentially
getting three different compositions out
of this single shot. This is the shot
you never have to cut. It's never boring
because your eye has something fresh to
look at. The setting and motion keep the
visuals interesting, and the staging of
the characters reinforces the emotional
conflict of the scene. If you pay close
attention to Spielberg's filmmaking,
you'll often find these kinds of
attributes in his shots, movement that
creates visual interest, and
compositions that change and develop
throughout the shot. along with staging
that expresses the emotional conflict of
the scene. Even for something as simple
as this twoshot at a table in Jaws, he
adds a swinging lamp overhead to create
movement in the shadows and then uses
the blocking of the characters to create
all these different compositions within
a single take. Spielberg definitely
wasn't the first and certainly isn't the
only director to use these kinds of
layered developing compositions. He's
just particularly good at it. You can
find more great examples of this kind of
unfolding shot in movies like Robert
Alman's Three Women. Here, a single shot
develops across three individually
interesting compositions. For a more
contemporary example, check out this
shot from Tar, which uses both mirrors
and depth to add visual interest to a
completely static shot.
And I've seen a lot of people talk about
this long take from Tar, which uses
developing composition very well, but
there are many examples of this kind of
thing on a subtler scale throughout the
film. This simple scene unfolds across
one unbroken take, which develops from
here to here, then from this to this
before finally landing here. You could
of course construct these kinds of
scenes in a way that allows you to cut
between each of the compositions and
that might be the safer option, but the
movements between each composition adds
a sense of visual interest and lends the
scene a sense of space and continuity
that you lose when you cut. I should
probably point out that when I talk
about developing composition, I'm not
just talking about movement. There are
plenty of movies I see these days where
movement is used within a shot to change
the composition. But frequently these
shots don't feel as interesting and
satisfying as say for example
Spielbergs. But what actually makes the
difference? As usual with film making,
the devil is in the details. Great
developing compositions usually have a
sense of precision in how they unfold.
movements are smooth and welltimed, and
the compositions the camera moves
between are just as intentionally
composed as any static shot. In
contrast, much of what I see from, let's
call it the default style of movement
today, has a kind of jelloy mushiness to
it. On top of that, there's often very
little variety in how the camera moves.
Instead of a combination of zooming,
panning, tracking, tilting, and booming
that have provided expressive variety to
camera movement throughout film history,
these days, I frequently see the camera
just kind of floating along at eye
level. This, of course, is mostly due to
the rise in popularity of steady cams
and gimbals, two tools which make
handheld camera work much smoother and
which have come to replace the dolly or
crane as the default for camera
movement. These tools are by no means
bad. They've produced incredible work.
Many of the long takes we've talked
about would have been impossible without
them. I also understand why productions
are drawn to them. They take less
equipment and setup time than dollies or
cranes, saving time, money, and creating
a lot more flexibility on location. But
I think this flexibility often results
in a lack of intentionality. And because
of the way these tools work, less
variety in types of movement. I don't
want the takeaway here to be steady cam
bad, dolly good. Ultimately, it's about
choosing the right tool for the job and
how you use it. The best directors and
cinematographers I know of understand
how a tripod, steady cam, handheld, or
dolly shot all have their own unique
feeling and use that specificity of
feeling to help tell their story.
There's a shot I've thought about a lot
from Martin Scorsesi's movie, The Last
Temptation of Christ. Here, Jesus is
walking alone and he thinks he hears
someone. perhaps God walking behind him.
He turns to look and the camera pushes
forward as if it's moving towards
something, but there's nothing there. It
pans back to Jesus as he starts walking
again and then he and the camera turn to
look once more.
>> Who's that? Who's following me? [music]
Is that you?
>> When moving the camera, it's common for
directors to have the camera follow the
action within the scene. This is called
motivating the camera movement. Often
you'll want to match the speed and
rhythm of the camera with the object
it's tracking. Or if you change
direction or start a new move from a
static point, you do so because the
camera picks up the action of someone or
something moving past. All of this helps
the camera work to feel more seamless
and invisible, as if it's reacting to or
simply a part of the movement within the
frame. But here in The Last Temptation
of Christ, the camera goes beyond
following an action. It has a life of
its own. It doesn't just turn when Jesus
turns. It also moves forward for a
closer look. It's as if the camera
itself and the mind of the film are
asking a question. This is the shot as
expression. The camera isn't just trying
to create visual interest or convey the
action and dialogue of the scene in an
interesting way. It's trying to use the
language of its own movement and
perspective to communicate something.
Sometimes we can get a clear idea of
what the symbolism of a specific shot is
expressing, but we don't have to for a
shot to be expressive. Sometimes the
expressiveness of the camera is more
mysterious, poetic, and lyrical.
Is this beautiful shot from Charlotte
Wells after sun expressing the relaxed
haziness of a summer vacation or a more
detached disassociation?
It might be both. Wells herself doesn't
necessarily need to have a concrete idea
of what the shot means for the audience
to find the shot meaningful within the
context of the film. She might, but
intention can just as easily mean a
well-developed intuition for the
emotional landscape of a shot within the
overall visual language of a film.
Sometimes it's the camera's perspective
that's expressing something. This can be
both intentional and unintentional. I
know you're familiar with the male gaze.
And someone like Alfred Hitchcock both
embodies this and at times made movies
that were drawing your attention to the
voyerism the movie itself was providing.
But what about the gaze of death in The
Sound of Falling? There are many shots
that seem to come from some perspective,
but as the film continues, you begin to
feel that this perspective isn't
inhabited by any of the characters we
see in the film. Instead, it seems much
more likely to be the perspective of a
ghost or something that's haunting the
film, which the characters within
occasionally perceive. There's a nearly
endless number of things a shot can
express or ways that a shot can express
things. Many of the shots in Sometimes I
Think About Dying seem to express how
disconnected and cut off the main
character feels from the world around
her. This shot from Agnes Vardis Cleo
from 5 to 7 expresses what the character
is feeling after receiving a diagnosis
from her doctor. There's no set of rules
for how to express something using a
shot. It's quite literally an art, not a
science. And not every shot needs to
express something. But using the shot to
express a feeling or idea is yet another
way of creating the shot.
When we think of a great shot, I think
there are two common types of shots that
immediately spring to mind.
The first is a shot with incredibly
bold, striking, or beautiful imagery.
These are the shots that stand out and
become iconic, sustaining our attention
and lingering in our memory simply on
the basis of their visual impact [music]
alone. These kinds of shots are very
popular in the internet age because you
can often capture what's impressive
about them with a single static frame.
These shots help you avoid blender
cutting simply because you don't need to
cut away to keep people's attention. Our
interest is held by the sheer beauty of
the shot itself.
The features that make for these kinds
of beautiful shots in film are as varied
as the elements that create beauty in
paintings or photographs. They often
feature vibrant color, intense [music]
contrast, curcal lighting, dramatic
atmosphere, or compositions that are
either extremely balanced or which have
a lot of angular graphic [music]
contrast. You might use maximalist
complexity to create visual interest or
minimalist simplicity. [music]
You might use a vibrant array of colors
or a muted monochromatic palette.
Sometimes beauty is simply found in the
quality of the light itself [music] or
by placing the camera in a surprising or
unusual location.
Park Chen Wuk is the master of this
right now.
There aren't really any rules for
creating this kind of shot. I'm often
[music] amazed just how much a little
bit of depth, some well-composed
reflections, or subtle movement within
the frame can add to a shot. Whatever
you can do to make something beautiful
or eye-catching will [music] work. But
while this kind of beauty and eye candy
certainly are some great examples of the
shot, I don't think this kind of iconic
shot is the only thing Marty and Thelma
had in mind. Iconic imagery is just one
way to create visual interest and hold
an audience's attention without cutting.
But it's possible to do the same thing
in other ways. And I don't want to
overlook the shots that might seem less
impressive based on a single frame, but
which really come to life when we see
how they unfold over time. For example,
I often see people reference this shot
from Fargo. And don't get me wrong, it's
beautiful. But I think this other shot
from the film is just as great. Yet,
what makes it interesting [music] relies
more on the movement within the frame,
and it's less likely to be cited as a
single frame example of a beautiful
shot.
Some of the most evocative shots of all
time rely on movement. This shot from
Tarovsky's The Mirror is a favorite of
mine, and it's beautiful if you look at
a single frozen frame, but the true
magic comes to life when you see it in
motion.
The gust of wind is so ethereal that
when I first saw it, I assumed it must
have just been one of the luckiest
accidents ever caught on camera. But it
was totally intentional and incredibly
well planned out. What's creating the
wind are helicopters sitting just out of
frame to the right spinning up their
blades. Let's talk about the other kind
of dramatically impressive shot that
usually comes up when we talk about this
subject.
>> The polar opposite of blender cutting,
long takes have been a fascination of
filmmakers since the medium was
invented. The rise of their popularity
in the last several decades has been to
some extent influenced by digital
cameras making them easier to pull off.
But I also think the trend of long takes
has been a creative reaction against
faster cutting becoming more of the
stylistic norm. Like the iconic shots, I
also love the long takes. Scorsesi has
used them to wonderful effect and many
filmmakers from Alfonso Kuran to
Alejandro Inaritu have pushed this kind
of thing much further. Yet, I had kind
of started to think that maybe the super
long take was getting a little played
out until
I saw this 36-inute take from Begon
Gun's criminally undertalked about
resurrection.
It's one of the most impressive examples
of a long take I've ever seen, proving
that there's still room for innovation
in the long take. And while long takes
exist on a spectrum from effective and
immersive to somewhat performative
gimmick. Overall, I'd usually much
rather watch this kind of thing than a
generic Blender cut scene. But simply
refusing to cut isn't necessarily what
makes the shot. I've seen examples of
longer or medium length takes recently
that feel to me just as generic as more
traditionally cut scenes. This long take
from Moonlight, for example, works well
because there's a lot of variety of
composition and movement throughout.
Starts as a frame that doesn't feel like
a tracking shot. that then evolves into
one before spinning into something much
more evocative and expressive and then
finally landing back at a much more
traditional composition.
>> No, no, no, hold on.
>> But there are even long takes on a
tripod that work. So, the real risk of
the long take is that it feels
incidental rather than intentional, as
if the filmmakers are doing a long take
just for the sake of doing it. If
cutting just for the sake of cutting is
ineffective storytelling, then I'd say
not cutting just for the sake of not
cutting is also ineffective. The key is
intention and whether the creative
choice works for the scene or the story.
But if it's not sheer iconographic
beauty or the lack of cuts that makes
for the shot, then what's the secret?
Like most artistic endeavors, it's hard
to define any concrete attributes. I'd
even argue it's impossible to come up
with a formula because part of what
makes something creatively interesting
is its ability to surprise us with
something new. So, as soon as you make a
set of rules, some filmmaker is going to
do something creatively interesting by
breaking them. Shots come in all shapes
and sizes. The shot can last for less
than a second or extend for the length
of an entire film. A shot can be static
and neutral or it can convey a frantic
energy. A shot can be actively searching
for something or passively reacting to
what is happening in the scene. A shot
can develop with intention or it can
aimlessly drift through space.
Ultimately, the shots I enjoy most are
the ones that feel like what they're
doing and why they're doing it is an
intentional choice that helps
communicate the story. You don't want
static neutrality when you're trying to
engage the audience in propulsive
energy. You don't want explosive
movement if you're trying to get the
audience to step back and reflect.
contemplatively on the scene. But most
of all, you don't want the shot to do
nothing, to just exist with no intention
but to collect one of many possible
images of the subject that will then be
tossed into an editing blender later on.
I mean, you can make a movie this way.
Plenty of people do, and some of them
make a lot of money at the box office,
but from my perspective, this style
doesn't use the full potential of film
as a storytelling medium. and is
ultimately less enjoyable to watch.
Blender cutting relies on a cut to hold
our attention. This works because every
time the frame is reset by a cut, our
brain is momentarily busy looking for
some new information on the screen.
Faster cutting doesn't really give your
brain time to take everything in before
it moves on to a new frame. And so, your
brain is constantly searching for new
information. This can be very effective
at grabbing and keeping your attention,
but it's also a little bit of a hack,
and it's sometimes used to smooth over a
lack of intentionality that exists in
the shots, choreography, editing, or
performances. To me, it's kind of like
the Doritos of film making. There's
nothing wrong with it ultimately, but
it's a way of hacking your brain's
dopamineergic reward centers to create
something tasty without really having to
provide real nutrition. When the editor
doesn't cut as quickly, the shot itself
has to be interesting enough to sustain
your attention for a longer period of
time. This presents a challenge for the
filmmakers, but if they step up and meet
that challenge, it can be incredibly
rewarding to watch.
This evocative shot from My Father's
Shadow uses a slow rotating pan to build
suspense and immerse us in the dramatic
environment that surrounds the
characters in this moment. My Father's
Shadow was one of my favorite movies
from last year, and it's currently
available to stream in the US and many
other places on Movie, [music] my
sponsor for this video. Movie is an
online handcurated streaming cinema with
incredible movies from all around the
world. In addition to My Father's
Shadow, you can also watch Masha
Shalinsk's beautiful and haunting Sound
of Falling. Check out those two films
and explore the rest of their incredible
[music] catalog. You can get 30 days
free of Movie at movie.com/toomasflight.
That's mubi.com/thomasflight.
[music]
Thanks again to Movie for sponsoring
this video.